updates to send page (#4359)
DFE-Digital/get-into-teaching-app: app/views/content/life-as-a-teacher/age-groups-and-specialisms/special-educational-needs.md

---

> title: "Teach pupils with special educational needs and disabilities"

Reviewer: Is there any merit in including `(SEND)` in the title now that it's been removed from the h1?

heading: "Teach pupils with special educational needs and disabilities"
description: |-

>   Find out how you can teach pupils with special educational needs and disabilities and how to become a special educational needs coordinator (SENCO).

Reviewer: Is there any merit in including `(SEND)` in the meta description now that it's been removed from the h1?

>   Find out how you can teach pupils with special educational needs and disabilities and how to become a special educational needs coordinator (SENCO).

Author: ```suggestion
  Find out how you can teach pupils with special educational needs and disabilities (SEND) and how to become a special educational needs coordinator (SENCO).
```

>   Find out how you can teach pupils with special educational needs and disabilities and how to become a special educational needs coordinator (SENCO).

Author: ```suggestion
  Find out how you can teach pupils with special educational needs and disabilities (SEND) and how to become a special educational needs coordinator (SENCO).
```

Teaching pupils with SEND offers you a unique opportunity to make a lasting impact in their lives. You’ll help pupils overcome challenges and guide them to discover their strengths and fulfil their potential. Through your support, they’ll build self-esteem and resilience. 

<blockquote class="quote quote--background-white quote--indent">
  <p>I'm passionate about being there for my students, helping them see their potential and overcome their own challenges."</p>
    <footer class="footer">
      <div class="author">
        <div>
            <cite class="name">Gloria, lead maths practitioner</cite>
        </div>
      </div>
</footer>
</blockquote>

Working with pupils with complex needs can be incredibly fulfilling. You’ll have the opportunity to: 

* gain a deep understanding of diverse learning needs 
* nurture a supportive learning environment  
* advocate for inclusivity  

> Teachers who focus on supporting pupils with SEND are often called SEND teachers, but all teachers teach children with complex needs. Whether you train to teach in mainstream schools, special schools, or both, you’ll teach pupils with SEND, and learn how to support their needs.

Reviewer: Is it right to say `often called`? Would it be more accurate to say something like `may be known as` / `may be referred to` / `may be called` (or something better!)? It sounds a bit like we are saying that is what they **are** / are called at schools at the moment?

## SEND-focused teaching roles

> All initial teacher training courses cover teaching pupils with SEND. Once you have gained QTS, you can choose to specialise in teaching and nurturing pupils with SEND in a more SEND-focused role. This could be through:

Reviewer: I think we need to say what QTS is? And maybe with a link to the QTS page? People may land on this page directly and may not know what we are talking about

```suggestion
All initial teacher training courses cover teaching pupils with SEND. Once you have gained qualified teacher status (QTS), you can choose to specialise in teaching and nurturing pupils with SEND in a more SEND-focused role. This could be through:
```

Reviewer: If you have the QTS link here, you could remove it from the SENCO section?

> All initial teacher training courses cover teaching pupils with SEND. Once you have gained QTS, you can choose to specialise in teaching and nurturing pupils with SEND in a more SEND-focused role. This could be through:

Reviewer: This para is quite hard, with three `SEND` references in it

Could the first sentence (`All initial.....`) be in a standalone para - would that help?

Is there any other way of wording the second sentence so the two `SEND`s are further apart? Or replace the `pupils with SEND` with `pupils with special educational needs and disabilities`?

> All initial teacher training courses cover teaching pupils with SEND. Once you have gained [qualified teacher status (QTS)](/train-to-be-a-teacher/what-is-qts), you can choose to specialise in teaching and nurturing pupils with SEND in a more SEND-focused role. This could be through:

Author: ```suggestion
All initial teacher training courses cover teaching pupils with SEND. 

Once you have gained [qualified teacher status (QTS)](/train-to-be-a-teacher/what-is-qts), you can choose to specialise in teaching and nurturing pupils with special educational needs and disabilities in a more SEND-focused role. This could be through:
```

      </div>
</footer>
</blockquote>

### Teaching in a special school

Special schools provide education for pupils with special educational needs and disabilities. Special schools with pupils aged 11 and older can specialise in 1 of the 4 areas of special educational needs: 

* communication and interaction 

* cognition and learning 

* social, emotional and mental health 

* sensory and physical needs 

During your initial teacher training, you may have the opportunity to have one of your school placements in a special school. This can enhance your understanding of how to plan and teach more effectively for all children.  

### Becoming a special educational needs co-ordinator

A special educational needs coordinator (SENCO) assesses, plans and monitors the progress of pupils with special educational needs and disabilities in mainstream schools. SENCOs also support teachers and teaching assistants in a range of ways including providing training, observing lessons and developing learning plans for pupils. 

As a SENCO you will get to know the specific needs of pupils who need extra support, so you can help them to feel comfortable and confident before teaching starts. 

> To become a SENCO, you’ll need to gain [qualified teacher status (QTS)](/train-to-be-a-teacher/what-is-qts) through initial teacher training and then complete a mandatory [SENCO national professional qualification (SENCO NPQ)](https://www.gov.uk/guidance/special-educational-needs-co-ordinators-national-professional-qualification). You do not need to complete the NPQ before taking a SENCO role, you have 3 years to complete the qualification. 

Reviewer: The last sentence is slightly confusing to me (not a fan of commas used like this but that could just be me!). I'm not sure how the 3 years quite relates - is it 3 years from taking a SENCO role? 3 years from starting the NPQ before becoming a SENCO?

Would it be clearer to break it into two sentences along the lines of:
`You do not need to complete the NPQ before taking a SENCO role. Once you become a SENCO, you must complete the qualification within 3 years.`

(I don't know if this is accurate - would need checking!)

> To become a SENCO, you’ll need to gain [qualified teacher status (QTS)](/train-to-be-a-teacher/what-is-qts) through initial teacher training and then complete a mandatory [SENCO national professional qualification (SENCO NPQ)](https://www.gov.uk/guidance/special-educational-needs-co-ordinators-national-professional-qualification). You do not need to complete the NPQ before taking a SENCO role, you have 3 years to complete the qualification. 

Author: ```suggestion
To become a SENCO, you’ll need to gain QTS through initial teacher training and then complete a mandatory [SENCO national professional qualification (SENCO NPQ)](https://www.gov.uk/guidance/special-educational-needs-co-ordinators-national-professional-qualification). You do not need to complete the NPQ before taking a SENCO role. Once you become a SENCO, you must complete the qualification within 3 years. 
```

As well as focusing on supporting pupils with SEND, many SENCOs will also teach in their main subject area. 

### Mandatory qualification in sensory impairment

To teach pupils with hearing impairments, vision impairments or multi-sensory impairments you’ll need a [mandatory qualification in sensory impairment (MQSI)](https://www.gov.uk/guidance/mandatory-qualifications-specialist-teachers) in addition to QTS.  

> An MQSI will give you the skills needed to recognise pupils’ barriers to learning and help them overcome these. 

Reviewer: I'm not sure whether this wording is really quite right - this makes it sound like the barriers are to do with the pupils and it is their problem to overcome, whereas some people would see these barriers as societal. Let's have a quick chat about this!

> An MQSI will give you the skills needed to recognise pupils’ barriers to learning and help them overcome these. 

Author: ```suggestion
An MQSI will give you the skills needed to recognise any barriers to learning that pupils may experience and help them overcome these. 
```

> ## Training for teaching pupils with SEND

Reviewer: It feels a bit odd to have this at the bottom of the page, having spoken about training earlier? But I appreciate that we want people to read the information first!

  - teaching
  - teacher
  - special school

---
Special educational needs and disabilities (SEND) can affect pupils’ ability to learn. For example, they may struggle to read or write because they have dyslexia, or they may have difficulties concentrating. Some pupils may have physical impairments which means they need special equipment to help them learn.  

Teaching pupils with SEND offers you a unique opportunity to make a lasting impact in their lives. You’ll help pupils overcome challenges and guide them to discover their strengths and fulfil their potential. Through your support, they’ll build self-esteem and resilience. 

<blockquote class="quote quote--background-white quote--indent">

>   <p>I'm passionate about being there for my students, helping them see their potential and overcome their own challenges.</p>

Author: ```suggestion
  <p>"I'm passionate about being there for my students, helping them see their potential and overcome their own challenges."</p>
```

>   <p>I'm passionate about being there for my students, helping them see their potential and overcome their own challenges.</p>

Reviewer 2: This quote only has one "

    <footer class="footer">
      <div class="author">
        <div>
            <cite class="name">Gloria, lead maths practitioner</cite>
        </div>
      </div>
</footer>

> </blockquote>

Author: @gemmadallmandfe I was struggling to get the quote component to work for this so two quotation marks showed, I I added the second quotation mark manually as a work around. Not sure if this type of thing requires a tech review?

Reviewer: Not sure whether quote partials work out of the box in markdown files - worth getting some dev help on this and also looping in @emmaachesongray for info

Working with pupils with complex needs can be incredibly fulfilling. You’ll have the opportunity to: 

* develop innovative teaching methods 
* gain a deep understanding of diverse learning needs 
* nurture a supportive learning environment  
* advocate for inclusivity  

Teachers who focus on supporting pupils with SEND are often called SEND teachers, but all teachers teach children with complex needs. Whether you train to teach in mainstream or special schools, or both, you’ll learn how to teach pupils with SEND. 

## SEND-focused teaching roles

> You can choose to specialise in teaching and nurturing pupils with SEND in a more SEND-focused role. This could be through:

Reviewer 2: I found the double 'SEND' a bit difficult to read in one sentence.

  
* teaching in a special school
* becoming a special educational needs co-ordinator (SENCO)
* completing the mandatory qualification in sensory impairment (MQSI)

<blockquote class="quote quote--background-white quote--indent">
  <p>My mentor was the special educational needs co-ordinator. This meant I was able to learn more about this role and improve my understanding of the strategies and support available for children with special educational needs and disabilities.</p>
    <footer class="footer">
      <div class="author">
        <div>
            <cite class="name">Abbe, trainee teacher</cite>
        </div>
      </div>
</footer>
</blockquote>

### Teaching in a special school

> Special schools provide education for pupils with special educational needs and disabilities. Special schools with pupils aged 11 and older can specialise in 1 of the 4 [areas of special educational needs](https://www.gov.uk/children-with-special-educational-needs): 

Author: ```suggestion
Special schools provide education for pupils with special educational needs and disabilities. Special schools with pupils aged 11 and older can specialise in 1 of the 4 areas of special educational needs: 
```

> Special schools provide education for pupils with special educational needs and disabilities. Special schools with pupils aged 11 and older can specialise in 1 of the 4 [areas of special educational needs](https://www.gov.uk/children-with-special-educational-needs): 

Reviewer 2: I'm a bit confused by how this link fits with the text/content message

As a SENCO you will get to know the specific needs of pupils who need extra support, so you can help them to feel comfortable and confident before teaching starts. 

To become a SENCO, you’ll need to gain [qualified teacher status (QTS)](/train-to-be-a-teacher/what-is-qts) through initial teacher training and then complete a mandatory [SENCO national professional qualification (SENCO NPQ)](https://www.gov.uk/guidance/special-educational-needs-co-ordinators-national-professional-qualification). You do not need to complete the NPQ before taking a SENCO role, you have 3 years to complete the qualification. 

As well as focusing on supporting pupils with SEND, many SENCOs will also teach in their main subject area. 

### Mandatory qualification in sensory impairment

To teach pupils with hearing impairments, vision impairments or multi-sensory impairments you’ll need a [mandatory qualification in sensory impairment (MQSI)](https://www.gov.uk/guidance/mandatory-qualifications-specialist-teachers) in addition to QTS.  

An MQSI will give you the skills needed to recognise pupils’ barriers to learning and help them overcome these. 

## Training for teaching pupils with SEND

> All initial teacher training courses cover teaching pupils with SEND. Once you have gained QTS, you can look for courses that specialise in SEND to develop your training further. 

Reviewer 2: I'm a bit confused by this. I read it as you have to get QTS first, before you specialise in SEND. But the courses on Find seem to let you get QTS and specialise in SEND on one course?

Author: Good point, and not sure, will check with policy!
